%OP%VS4.1283 (06-Apr-92), Colton Software, R4000 2029 4983 8986

%OP%PL55
%OP%TM2
%OP%BM2
%OP%LM5
%OP%FS0
%OP%WC50,1296,424,1364,0,0,0,0
%CO:A,12,72%
%C%%H2%PipeDream 4 Charts

This file gives details of PipeDream's charts and applies to PipeDream 
version 4.12 and later versions.  It contains a description of the 
charts you can create with PipeDream with hints on how to create them.  
More explicit descriptions of building chart types are given in the 
sub-directories within this directory.

%H2%General 

PipeDream 4 provides powerful and flexible charting capability of 
numerical information.  The charts are dynamic; that is, when the 
numbers they are based on change within PipeDream, the charts 
automatically update to take account of the changes.  This provides 
extremely useful what-if type usage enabling you to investigate how
different data affects a trend.

Like other aspects of PipeDream the volume of data you can chart is 
limited not by PipeDream but by aspects of your system resources.  For 
example the number of charts you can make, the number of series within 
each chart and the number of points within each series are all limited 
not by PipeDream but by (i) the amount of memory in your computer, (ii) 
if you are using RISC OS 2 the number of windows on the screen and 
(iii) the amount of time spent redrawing the chart.  This last point 
isn't to imply PipeDream's charts are slow - at exhibitions people 
frequently think that our demonstration computers are using an ARM 3 
processor when they aren't - but if you expecting PipeDream to draw 
hundreds or thousands of 3D bars you will have to wait a little while 
for it to finish.

%H2%Flexibility

PipeDream's charts are very flexible in other ways.  You can add new 
data series to, or remove existing data series from, your charts at 
any time.  This enables you to chart data coming from different parts 
of your spreadsheet or even from different spreadsheets.

You also have control over the appearance of each element of the chart.  
For any element of the chart containing text, you can specify the font 
style, size and colour of the text individually.  You can also change 
the colour and line styles of any graphic of the chart.  In the 
rectangular areas of the bars in bar charts, and the chart background 
you can specify any draw file or sprite to give extra customisation.  
This feature provides the famous penguin graphics and, before you ask, 
you can use any draw file instead of the penguins.  Many people have 
asked "Why Penguins?".  Well, why not?  The real answer is to be found 
in an excellent book called "DTP Seeds" published by 4mation at Linden 
Lea, Rock Park, Barnstaple, Devon EX39 2AQ which is well worth every 
penny of its £8.45 cost.

%C%%H2%Overlays

PipeDream's charts bring overlays to the Archimedes.  These enable you 
to plot two different types of chart at the same time.  For example as 
part of your geography studies you may wish to plot a bar chart of 
rainfall over a particular period together with a line chart of mean 
temperatures.  You would do this using overlays.

You could also use overlays to plot one data series on a linear axis 
together with another data series on a parallel logarithmic axis.


%C%%H2%Principles of operation

There are three simple principles of operation in PipeDream charts.  
When you have grasped each of these you will find using the charts easy 
and natural.

1.  Specify the chart data.  To do this simply mark a block within your 
PipeDream document and select New chart from the Chart menu.  This will 
give you your default chart in the %H4%Chart editing window.

2.  Specify the chart type.  To do this bring up the chart menu within 
the chart editing window.  Slide across to the Gallery sub-menu where 
you will see entries for Pie, Bar, Line and Scatter galleries.  Click 
on one of these and PipeDream will display the gallery for the chart 
type.  The gallery is a dialogue box which presents a set of icons 
showing different chart types.  Click on any of these icons and 
PipeDream will redisplay the chart in that type.

Also within the galleries are a number of switches.  For example, the 
bar and line galleries contain a 3D switch.  You can change the switch 
settings and these will be taken into account when PipeDream next 
redraws the chart.  You can force PipeDream to redraw the chart without 
losing the gallery by clicking OK with the Adjust button.

The bar, line and scatter galleries have an extended set of switches 
which you can reveal by clicking on the full-size icon in the top-right 
of the gallery.  These extended switches enable you to switch on or off 
other attributes such as line of best fit.  Whilst these provide 
powerful fine-tuning they can be safely ignored by beginners to the 
charts.

3.  Customize parts of the chart.  To do this make a selection within 
the chart and then apply something to it.  To make a selection, point 
at it and click the Select button.  Users of !Draw will find this very 
easy.  The current selection is named in the top-left of the chart 
editing window.  Many operations can then be chosen from the Selection 
sub-menu.  For example, colour, line and text styles can be chosen from 
here.  You can also change many attributes of an axis in the Axis 
dialogue box.

To select a whole series of data, click with the Select button on one 
of the data elements.  To select just a single point within the series, 
click with the Adjust button on it.  If you have a data series selected 
you can change its attributes using either the Series dialogue box on 
the Selection sub-menu, or by making selections in one of the 
galleries.

If you cannot select any particular element of the chart because it is 
hidden by another element, click in the top-left of the chart editing 
window where the selected element is named.  Clicking Select here will 
select the next type of element.  Clicking Adjust here will clear the 
selection.

To bring pictures in to the chart, select the chart elements you want 
the picture to fill and drag in a draw file from a directory viewer.
For example, if you select the plot area and drag a draw file, 
PipeDream will display the draw as a backdrop to your chart.  Very 
impressive displays can be made using this technique.  At Colton 
Software we often use the file called BackDrop which is provided in the 
Worldcup directory.

Similarly with Penguin Graphics.  Make your first Penguin Graph by 
selecting one of the two penguin icons in the bar gallery and switching 
off 3D.  Then select either a whole series or a single data point and 
drag in a draw file to fill the data points with the new picture. Some 
suitable pictures are provided in the Pictures directory on this disc.
Flags are very good for using in stacked penguin charts.

Points within line and scatter charts are also specified by draw files 
which you can supply.  Select a point or a series and drag a draw file 
into the window.

The pictures that PipeDream uses as defaults are in the directories 
!PipeDream.Pictures and !PipeDream.Markers .  The Pictures directory 
contains the pictures for the Penguin graphics.  Series 1 is file S1, 
Series 2 is S2 and so on.  The Markers directory contains the pictures 
for line and scatter charts using the same convention.  If you wish to 
change the default pictures for these charts, simply replace the files 
S1, S2, and so on with your own draw files.

If you wish to specify draw files on a point by point basis, rather 
than a line by line basis, specify S1P1 for Series 1 Point 1, S1P2 for 
Series 1 Point 2, and so on.


%C%%H2%Learning to use charts

Two directories are provided to help you learn how to create and modify 
PipeDream's charts.  These are 1_3Dbars and 2_Penguins.  Start by 
loading the Rainfall file from 1_3Dbars and follow the instructions.  
You will learn how to create a chart, select its chart-type and how to 
modify it.

After Rainfall move on the the file Penguins file in 2_Penguins.  This 
will show you how to create your own Penguin graphics.  

When you have been through both of these little tutorials you will have 
learnt the main principles of PipeDream's charts.  From here the best 
thing is to experiment with different charts.  Load the Rainfall file 
again, or create a table of your own data, and investigate different 
chart types from the galleries.  Make selections and investigate all of 
the options on the selection menu.  Investigate the Axis dialogue box 
for both the x-axis (Axis 1) and the y-axis (Axis 2).  This contains 
many of the options such as grid lines, logarithmic scales, tick points 
and axis positioning which you can use to provide the finishing touches 
to your charts.

Try also the world cup chart.  This might be a good starting point for 
you to make a chart for the BBC Acorn User competition...


%C%%H2%Making your own data table

When making your own table of numbers to use for making charts remember 
these rules:

1. Use the first row for your series headings and the first column for 
your data labels.

2. Make sure that the numbers that you want to plot are all in number 
slots.  If a number is in a number slot it will normally appear right 
aligned in the slot and with two decimal places like this:

%V%%R%23
%V%%R%1234

However, if the numbers are in text slots they will appear left 
justified and without any decimal places unless you have typed them 
yourself, like this:

23
1234

If PipeDream cannot find any number slots in the block that you specify 
it will give you the message "There is no numeric data in the marked 
block.  Do you want to continue?"  This is usually a sign that you need 
to put your data in number slots and try again.

To put a single number in a number slot, move the caret to the slot, 
press F2 and then press RETURN.  Alternatively, click with the mouse in 
the formula line at the top of the window and then click on the green 
tick, or press RETURN.

If you want to enter a lot of numbers in number slots, bring up the 
Options dialogue box from the Files menu, and select New slot format: 
numbers.  When you now type numbers in they will automatically be 
entered in numeric slots.  

If you want to start a new document as a spreadsheet, select Numbers 
from the New document menu from the PipeDream icon bar menu.

Finally if you want to convert a block of text slots into numeric 
slots, or vice versa, mark the block and select Number <> Text 
(Ctrl BNT) from the blocks menu.
%CO:B,12,60%%CO:C,12,48%%CO:D,12,36%%CO:E,12,24%%CO:F,12,12%